the u.s secretary of state anthony
blinken is in
israel to try to consolidate the
ceasefire with the palestinians
following the worst flare-up of violence
in years let's go straight to laura
trevelyan who joins us
from jerusalem now he arrived a few
hours ago the ceasefire's still in place
laura is that what he's still trying to
uphold rather than
pushing on with any concrete peace talks
at the moment
yes that's right tim quite modest aims
at least
publicly for the top american diplomat
as he's here on this
tour of the middle east his first since
taking office right now he's meeting the
israeli prime minister benjamin
netanyahu in the prime minister's office
here in jerusalem and of course even
that itself is contested the israelis
claim jerusalem as their capital but the
palestinians
want east jerusalem to be the capital of
their eventual
state so everything here is so symbolic
and so freighted but yes
anthony blinken is here to make sure the
ceasefire is upheld
to get humanitarian aid into gaza
something that israel's cooperation is
required for because it controls the
entry to the strip along with egypt and
then he wants to talk about the massive
reconstruction effort for gaza after the
bombing again
very contentious with the israelis
because they do not want the
reconstruction effort
for that money to be diverted by hamas
so that they make more rockets to fire
at israel
neither do the americans the americans
objective is to try to strengthen
the palestinian authority in the west
bank and somehow reengage
them in the gaza strip very difficult
given hamas control the gaza strip and
there's a lot of rivalry
so all of this on anthony blinken's
agenda he meets first with prime
minister netanyahu followed by a press
conference and then this afternoon he
goes to ramallah in the west bank
and he meets the head of the palestinian
authority mahmoud abbas
but but no talks though with hamas as
was made absolutely clear a few days ago
by
joe biden but as you say i mean hamas is
in control in gaza
and abu mazen abbas has has stopped
elections
on the west bank for fear of losing to
hamas there as well so why are the
americans negotiating with somebody
who isn't really wielding any power at
all
well the americans won't negotiate
directly with hamas because they regard
it as a terrorist
organization and there are all kinds of
laws in america which prevent
direct negotiation and the flow of aid
to terrorist organizations which is why
it's very complicated this question of
getting
aid into gaza through the palestinian
authority somehow as the americans
want to do with the united nations so
all of this will be discussed but
anthony blinken also is going on to
egypt and to jordan remember it's the
egyptians who talk to hamas directly
they're the only ones who can speak
both to hamas and to the israelis they
brokered this ceasefire
they're doing the heavy lifting on the
details to keep it going the egyptian
foreign minister
has been here back and forth between
gaza and the west bank the last few days
uh so the americans are here for the big
picture but let's make sure this
ceasefire holds then anthony blinker
will go on
to talk to the egyptians about the
detail and he'll meet with the
jordanians and by the way the jordanians
key
to perhaps trying to calm down this
inter-communal violence that we're
seeing here in jerusalem
the disputed al-aqsa mosque one of the
holiest
places in islam where religious
nationalist jews increasingly want to
pray
something which is causing tension with
palestinians because the jordanians
control that
access to the mosque they could be key
in trying to come up with some kind of
resolution to this simmering conflict
just yesterday tim two israelis were
stabbed here on the street their
assailant was shot dead
yeah just briefly laura it was president
trump who controversially moved the u.s
embassy
from tel aviv to jerusalem is it still
there
any plans by the biden administration to
reverse that
the bride administration is not going to
move the embassy but what they could do
is open the consulate here for the
palestinians
this is something that would reopen
relations with the palestinians
and president biden was very careful to
say when anthony blinken left on his
trip that one of the purposes of this
trip is to restore
relations with the palestinians because
they've been abandoned
for so long and senior state department
officials said basically relations with
the palestinians have been
missing in action on background as it
was put for some years so that's
also the purpose of this trip to
re-engage the palestinians and make them
feel that this isn't quite such a
one-sided process
okay laura uh with the very latest on
jerusalem thanks very much